









01:198:461 Machine Learning Principles











































Rutgers HomeSASSearch Rutgers










Search ...  



















Search ...  




















Department of Computer Science




Department of Computer Science






















Rutgers SAS Navigation





                                Home                            




                                About                                







                                The Department                            




                                Employment                                







                                details                            








                                Industrial Affiliates Program                            








                                People                                







                                Professors                                







                                Details                            








                                Lecturers                            




                                Affiliated Faculty                            




                                Researchers                            




                                Administrative Staff                                







                                Details                            








                                Graduate Students                                







                                Details                            








                                Technical Staff                            




                                Emeritus                            




                                In Memoriam                                







                                Memoriam Details                            








                                Alumni                                







                                Details                            








                                Distinguished Alumni                            








                                Academics                                







                                Undergraduate                                







                                Learning Goals                            




                                Why Computer Science                            




                                Prospective Students                                







                                profile                            








                                Major - BA Degree                            




                                Major - BS Degree                            




                                Minor(s)                            




                                Courses Schedule                            




                                Course Information                            




                                Course Synopses                                







                                Course Details                            








                                Advising                            




                                Electives                            




                                Honors                            




                                Academic Integrity Policy                                







                                Introduction                            




                                Examinations                            




                                Programming Assignments                            








                                Introductory Computer Science Offerings                            




                                Computer Science Course Structure                            




                                Admission to the Major                            




                                Computer Science Undergraduate Program Tracks                            




                                CS Degrees                                







                                B.A. Degree                                







                                Sample BA Schedule                            








                                B.S. Degree                                







                                Sample BS Schedule                            








                                Minor in CS                            




                                CS Honors Program                            








                                Undergraduate Student Organizations                            




                                Course Registration and Special Permission                            








                                Graduate                                







                                Prospective Students                            




                                M.S. Program                                







                                Admission Requirements                                







                                Admission                            








                                Financial Aid                            




                                Transfer of Credits                            




                                Apply Now                            




                                Advising                            




                                Degree Requirements                            




                                Course Categories - Original                            




                                Course Categories (new)                                







                                Course Categories                            








                                Study Plans                                







                                General CS                            




                                Massive Data Analytics                            




                                AI/Machine Learning                            




                                Robotics                            




                                Systems/Security                            




                                Vision/Visualization/Graphics                            








                                Requirements Prior to Fall 2020                            




                                Course Load                            




                                Scholastic Standing                            




                                Learning Goals                            




                                Complaint & Appeals Process - MS                            




                                About Us                            




                                FAQ                            




                                M.S. Portal                            




                                MS Program Concentrations                                







                                Study Plan                            




                                Admission Requirements                            




                                Apply Now                            




                                Practical Training                            




                                Learning Goals                            




                                Graduation Requirements                            




                                FAQ                            








                                Courses Schedule                            




                                Course Synopses                                







                                Course Details                            












                                Ph.D. Program                                







                                Summary of Requirements                            




                                Transfer of Credits                            




                                Scholastic Standing                            




                                Thesis Format                            




                                Breadth Requirement                            




                                Depth Requirement                            




                                Dissertation Requirement                            




                                Master Degree to Doctorate Degree                            




                                Financial Aid                            




                                Admission Requirements                            




                                In-House Residence                            




                                Doctoral Requirements                            




                                Study Plans                            




                                Learning Goals                            




                                Ph.D. Alumni                            




                                Course Load                            




                                Computer Science Program                            




                                Dissertation Committee & Proposal                            




                                Complaint & Appeals Process - PhD                            








                                Research & Teaching                            




                                Introduction to the Department                            




                                Activities and Facilities                                







                                LCSR                            




                                Computing                            




                                Libraries                            




                                CSGSS                            




                                Colloquia and Seminars                            








                                Activities outside the Department                                







                                Research Centers                            




                                Cooperative Program with Princeton University                            








                                Other Important Information                            




                                Graduate Course Information                                







                                Taking Courses                            




                                Courses from other Departments                            




                                Some Undergraduate Courses                            








                                Graduate Student Organizations                                







                                Graduate Student Organizations Details                            








                                Course Registration and Special Permission                            




                                Course Synopses                            












                                News & Events                                







                                News                                







                                News                            








                                Highlights                                







                                Highlight                            








                                CS Events                                







                                Research & Faculty Candidate Talks                            




                                Computer Science Department Colloquium                            




                                Qualifying Exam                            




                                Defense (PhD, Masters, Pre)                            




                                CS Events Monthly View                            




                                Events Feed                            




                                iCal Export                            




                                Past Events                            








                                Videos of Past Events                                







                                DCS Lectures & Presentations on Youtube                            




                                Recent Talks at DCS                            




                                Events                            




                                Other Events                            




                                Demos                            




                                History of Computing - Video Files of Interest                            












                                Research                                







                                Computer and Network Systems                                







                                Computer Architecture                            




                                Computer Security                            




                                Computer Systems (Operating Systems)                            




                                Cyber-Physical Systems                            




                                Databases and Information Systems                            




                                High-Performance Computing                            




                                Mobile Systems and Networks                            




                                Networks and Distributed Systems                            




                                Programming Languages And Compilers                            




                                Software Engineering                            








                                Intelligent Systems                                







                                Artificial Intelligence                            




                                Computational Biomedicine, Medical Imaging and Bioinformatics                            




                                Computational Neuroscience                            




                                Computer Animation, Graphics and Simulation                            




                                Computer Vision                            




                                Data Science and Social Networks                            




                                Human-Computer Interaction                            




                                Knowledge Representation                            




                                Language Technologies                            




                                Machine Learning                            




                                Robotics                            








                                Theory of Computing                                







                                About                            




                                People                                







                                Affiliated Faculty                            




                                Post Doc                            




                                Students                            








                                Research Topics                                







                                Big Data Algorithmics                            




                                Computational Complexity Theory                            




                                Computational Geometry                            




                                Cryptography / Privacy                            




                                Data Structures                            




                                Error-Correcting Codes                            




                                Machine Learning                            




                                Mathematical Programming and Combinatorial Optimization                            




                                Numerical Methods                            




                                Quantum Computing                            




                                Streaming Algorithms                            








                                Events                            




                                News                            












                                Resources                                







                                Business Office                            




                                Internal Applications                            




                                Technical Support & Services                            








                                Donate                            




                                Contact                            



 


















	Course Details	

 01:198:461 Machine Learning Principles




   


 Course Number: 
01:198:461

 Instructor: 
Karl Stratos 

 Course Type: 
Undergraduate

 Semester 1: 
FALL

 Credits: 
4

 Description: 
This course is a systematic introduction to machine learning, covering theoretical as well as practical aspects of the use of statistical methods. Topics include linear models for classification and regression, support vector machines, regularization and model selection, and introduction to deep learning. Application examples are taken from areas like computer vision, natural language processing, information retrieval and others.
Machine learning is a vast, fast-changing field. The course is designed to provide a solid starting point by focusing on timeless technical foundations. Students will learn fundamental concepts in the field such as generalization and overfitting, bias-variance tradeoff, Bayes optimality, and error decomposition.  Students will also learn how to implement key techniques in the field from scratch including gradient descent, kernel trick, boosting, and expectation maximization. The course content will be delivered by a combination of written assignments that require rigorous proofs and self-contained Python Juypter Notebooks that require completing missing portions and empirically investigating the behavior of models on datasets. The course will reinforce learning with a series of short quizzes throughout the semester.   
The course content is designed to be accessible to all SAS students regardless of their majors who have an adequate background in linear algebra, calculus, probability, and programming.





 Instructor Profile: 
Stratos, Karl

 Prerequisite Information: 
Although the course has CS 206 as one of the pre-requisites, which requires M 152 (Calculus II), it does not require students to have an in-depth knowledge of integration. Thus, this prerequisite can be replaced by alternative classes on probability in Mathematics or Statistics. 

 Expected Work: 
To assess if students have a suitable technical background, there will be a short entrance quiz on linear algebra, calculus (differentiation only), and probability. To make this serious but not too impactful on the grade, it will count as 5% of the final grade. 

To assess that students have acquired basic literacy in all the concepts, tools, and techniques they are taught, they will be given 3 short quizzes periodically through the semester. 

There will be five assignments each given 2 weeks to complete. The assignments are designed to be challenging but rewarding. Collaboration is allowed and encouraged as long as students (1) write their own solutions entirely on their own, and (2) specify names of student(s) they collaborated with in their writeups. The students will need to digest and reformulate the lecture content in order to successfully complete the assignments. Discussion about assignment problems on Canvas is encouraged.  

There will be a final exam to assess the student’s ability to put together the concepts and tools they have learned in the course. The quizzes and the written assignments will provide sufficient preparation for  


























 Exams: 
Grade Evaluation

Entrance quiz			5%
Quizzes				15%
Assignments			50%
Final Exam			30%


 Notes: 
The course is focused on basic principles of machine learning. In particular, students must implement everything from scratch (i.e., using Python/NumPy only, no Scikit/PyTorch/TensorFlow). This will require a true understanding of core machine learning techniques, which are mostly used as black box tools in existing CS courses such as 210 (Data Management in Data Science) and 439 (Introduction to Data Science). Thus the course can serve as a natural follow-up for students who have used these techniques in 210 or 439 and want to understand their underlying principles more deeply. Another major distinction from 210 and 439 is that the course has no data preparation or analysis components. The course assumes that data is given and is only concerned with representation, modeling, estimation, and model selection for general prediction problems. It will thus reinforce and complement existing classes and they will eventually lead to a track for a Data Science major.











Contacts



Departmental ChairUlrich Kremer
Undergraduate DirectorSantosh Nagarakatte






Undergraduate Menu




Learning GoalsWhy Computer ScienceProspective StudentsMajor - BA DegreeMajor - BS DegreeMinor(s)Courses ScheduleCourse InformationCourse SynopsesAdvisingElectivesHonorsAcademic Integrity PolicyIntroductory Computer Science OfferingsComputer Science Course StructureAdmission to the MajorComputer Science Undergraduate Program TracksCS DegreesUndergraduate Student OrganizationsCourse Registration and Special Permission






Undergraduate Quicklinks




Academic Calendar


Course Schedule Planner


Degree Navigator


MyMajor


SAS Academic Advising


SAS Core Curriculum


University Schedule of Classes


Web Registration System



















Connect with Rutgers




Rutgers HomeRutgers TodaymyRutgersAcademic CalendarCalendar of EventsSAS Events








Explore SAS




Departments & Degree-Granting ProgramsMajors & MinorsResearch Programs, Centers, & InstitutesInternational ProgramsDivision of Life Sciences








Quick Links




We Are Hiring!
Undergraduate Academic Advising
Undergraduate Program
Graduate Program
Welcome New CS Undergraduate Students
Course Registration and Special Permission
Course Schedule









Contact Us



Department of Computer ScienceRutgers, The State University of New Jersey110 Frelinghuysen RoadPiscataway, NJ 08854-8019
(848) 445-2001
















HomeSite MapSearchLogin













Back to Top


Copyright 2024, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. All rights reserved.
						Rutgers is an equal access/equal opportunity institution. Individuals with disabilities are encouraged to direct suggestions, comments, or complaints concerning any accessibility issues with Rutgers web sites to:  or complete the Report Accessibility Barrier or Provide Feedback Form.







